

Samuel Iwelu
Professor Andrea Hasenbank
English 103
23th Nov 2020
Reporting Should be Strictly Factual, Without Literary Elements
Since the early seventeenth century, news has become one of the main staples in society. News reporting has evolved from early messengers bearing news for the wealthy, to narrative style news pamphlets, and later on to the editorial style of news that we see today. Through the centuries, reporting has become an increasingly integral part of our daily lives. Although the medium through which people receive their news has changed through the centuries, the news is still relied on for the flow of information across different locations. Modern democratic countries today value the independence of reporting -- as in free press -- as a major component and foundation for any democratic society. The use of literary elements in news reporting can be viewed as a regression to historical methods of reporting news. Historically, news pamphlets are associated with a narrative style of reporting. Elements such as characterization, description, and interpretation were heavily relied on by journalists to sell certain news as stories to the public -- especially in those times of limited education. These new stories could then be used to influence the public perception of certain people or concepts, thus giving the media some degree of power over their audience. The news is ideally meant to be factual and unbiased. The news cannot be reported ideally with the use of literary elements and given that the media has some degree of  power over their audiences, conflicts of interest could arise when journalists fail to report news objectively. Literary elements used in reporting allow for narration or interpretation, which is a method through which the public can be manipulated by news media; as objective facts of a story can become clouded by subjective interpretations of the reporter. As such, it is difficult to achieve objectivity and preserve the credibility of news reporting when literary elements such as description, dialogue, or character are used.
Reporting the news plays a vital role in our society today. As Lasseter puts it in his article “No other Allegiance:,” reporting the news “essentially...is to furnish the people with information upon which they can base their decisions in governing themselves and conducting their daily relationships” (1). Since the rise of news media, people have increasingly depended on the news for reliable information about events occurring around the world. Based on the information reported by the news, people make decisions concerning themselves and these decisions could also influence society at large. Ergo, reporting news grants power to media publishers and journalists over the public, because they are able to influence -- to a great extent -- the public’s perception of any topics covered by the news. Ideally, with reporters having such power over the public there should be some protocols associated with reporting. Such protocols can deal with controlling conflicting interests when it comes to reporting a news story. These conflicting interests may include pressure from sponsors of the news media, opposing sides of a news story or, most especially, the reporter’s viewpoint and bias.  Lasseter states that “[reporters]  should be a group set apart, free from all influences except that of broad public opinion as expressed upon and through the newspaper” (4). While it may not be implicitly stated, Lasseter’s point about reporting being free from all influences except the public also extends to the bias and viewpoint of the reporters themselves. His opinion is further expressed as he states that “[reporters] [should] not generally be committed to any one viewpoint”(4). The use of literary elements -- such as characterization, description, or dialogue --  to report the news makes news stories more susceptible to the bias and viewpoint of the reporter. When reporting, literary elements can be used to create and portray certain narratives of a news story; which, given the power that media organizations have, could be used to influence the public’s perception of such a story. Since news reporting plays such an important role in society today, avoiding conflicts of interest is crucial, and the use of literary techniques by journalists could directly undermine efforts to present a unbiased news story to the public.
Literary elements in reporting, specifically characterization, can be used to create certain narratives within a story. Characterization within the news allows reporters to attach certain annotations to different components of a story. These characterizations may be correct. However, verification of these characterizations cannot always be thorough with each news report. Removing any form of false narratives in news to preserve its integrity can be achieved by avoiding use of characterization or other literary techniques within a news report. In the study “Newsworthiness of Missing Persons Cases:..” by Jeanis Michelle and Ráchael Powers, an example of characterization is shown when “the media...classifies victims seen as vulnerable, sympathetic, and innocent as worthy of more media attention”(668). In classifying certain demographics of the population as more newsworthy, there is an innate characterization of sympathy associated with the public’s perception of such groups. Thus, allowing for certain narratives to be applied to these groups regardless of whether they are correct or not. These narratives for the classified demographic include being “portrayed as weak, needing protection and assistance”(676). Thus with the sympathetic narratives that these demographics have with the public, they are a lot more likely to be overrepresented in the media. Hence, this overrepresentation can lead to bias in the media. Bias for certain groups in media as a result of characterization, does not allow for ideal objectivity of the news. This is because “[characterization] of...victim[s] ha[s] an effect on the amount of news coverage”(681) that the victims belonging to those certain groups will receive. Therefore, reporting using literary elements such as character can fester subjective narratives with favoritism for certain groups in the news which undermines the credibility of a news report. 
Characterization and use of other literary techniques in reporting impact the public’s perception on certain groups or topics. According to Jeanis Michelle and Ráchael Powers, use of literary techniques to create narratives in the media, can create “stigmatizing depictions”(679) of certain groups in the news. These depictions of certain groups, may not be directly intended by reporters but the perspectives of a narrative can denigrate perception of certain groups. For example, the media's negative portrayal of issues such as mental illness “shape society’s perception of mental illness and foster stigmatization”(679) towards this topic. As a result of the narrative for mental illness achieved through characterization and use of other literary elements in reporting, the public perception of issues such as mental illness has been influenced to an unfavourable one. Furthermore, Jeanis Michelle and Ráchael Powers discuss the effect of narration on different demographics within the media. They state that narration “has the potential to shape viewers’ beliefs about entire groups of people”(680). As such, when reporting there is an ethical responsibility to provide factual and accurate information on the story being covered. Narrative style of reporting, which is achieved through use of various literary techniques, is susceptible to subjective opinion from reporters, which directly contradicts Lassterte’s point that the news should provide “a wholly, unbiased picture of”(4) a news story. However, news that deals strictly with facts and minimize the use of literary elements and narration are more objective. Given the influence that news reports have on the public opinion, favouring reports with minimal use of literary elements can be viewed as the safer and ethical choice for any reporter when trying to maintain the credibility of a story -- which should be the top priority for any reporter.
Over time, news reporting has evolved to be an important means for spread of information. News is depended on by the public for information on current issues and events; and since news reports shape public opinion to a large extent, there is a requirement for news reports to maintain credibility and objectivity when covering a story. Such requirements for the news cannot always be achieved with the use of narrative style for reporting. One way narration in an article is achieved, is through the use of literary elements such as dialogue, description and especially characterization. So, to reduce narration in news -- which can lead to false opinions and interpretations -- it is important that the use of literary elements in reporting are avoided whenever possible. Subsequently, the ideal role of the press to relay accurate information can be realized.















Works cited
Lasseter, Robert. "'No Other Allegiance': The Impossible Role of the Press." Nieman Reports vol 
1, no. 3, July 1947, pp. 1-5.

Jeanis, Michelle N., and Ráchael A. Powers. “Newsworthiness of Missing Persons Cases: An   
Analysis of Selection Bias, Disparities in Coverage, and the Narrative Framework of 
News Reports.” Deviant Behavior, vol. 38, no. 6, June 2017, pp. 668–683. EBSCOhost, 
doi:10.1080/01639625.2016.1197618.






